# Renal handling of enalaprilat.

*S K Mujais, A Quintanilla, M Zahid, K Koch, W Shaw, T Gibson*

American journal of kidney diseases : the official journal of the National Kidney Foundation · 1992-03-18


## Abstract

Most converting enzyme inhibitors share a predominantly renal dual elimination pathway consisting of glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Since enalaprilat has two functional acidic groups, it is likely that it may be secreted via the proximal tubule organic acid system and, thus, its clearances would exceed that of glomerular filtration rate markers. We therefore examined the renal clearance of enalaprilat in normal volunteers and compared it with simultaneously measured inulin and creatinine clearances to explore the contribution of tubular secretion to the renal elimination of the drug. Twelve healthy male subjects with an age range of 24 to 58 years (mean +/- SE, 33.1 +/- 2.8) were studied. They had representative height (178.6 +/- 1.99 cm) and weight (73.3 +/- 2.1 kg) and had normal renal function as judged by blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (6 +/- 0.3 mmol/L [17 +/- 0.8 mg/dL]), plasma creatinine (88 +/- 3 mumol/L [1.0 +/- 0.03 mg/dL]), and creatinine clearance determined by a prestudy 24-hour urine collection (123.2 +/- 6.2 mL/min). Results are as follows: mean creatinine clearance, 2.12 mL/s (127 mL/min); mean inulin clearance, 119.1 ml/min mean creatinine clearance/inulin clearance, 1.07 mean enalaprilat protein binding, 37.9% unbound enalaprilat clearance, 222.4 ml/min; and the mean fractional enalaprilat clearances were: enalaprilat clearance/creatinine clearance, 1.72 (P less than 0.05, difference from 1.0); enalaprilat clearance/inulin clearance, 1.85, (P less than 0.05, difference from 1.0). Our results demonstrate that the clearance of free enalaprilat exceeds that of inulin and creatinine, suggesting that elimination of the drug proceeds through two complementary pathways, namely glomerular filtration and tubular secretion.